[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There was a Rumi saying,
"The wound is the place where
the light enters you."
That best says what today's
guest, Sandra Ingerman,
brings to her shamanic healing.
Her new book, "The
Book of Ceremony",
shares her life story and path
as a counselor, and healer,
and shaman.
It's been marked by very
stark events such as three
near-death experiences, which
most people at best get one,
and you had three.
And so many of the
people that sit with me
have had near-death
experiences, usually just one,
that really marked a
sweeping change in their life
in consciousness.
So you required three.
And they're all so odd.
So first of all,
well, one it would
seem almost like your
little accident prone,
but, obviously,
it's more than that.
Let's start out with
you as a little kid,
because you were very
sensitive little child.
And let's go into the
first time that your life
was nearly snatched away.
>> Yeah, well, I grew up
in Brooklyn, New York.
And I was this
incredible nature lover,
and I loved everything
about life, and the colors.
And I thought everything
was so beautiful.
And so, I was an odd child,
because I had a spiritual life
as soon as I was born.
>> Where did you get most
of your nature experience
in Brooklyn?
>> Well, a lot of people think
that Brooklyn has no parks
or anything.
>> Yeah, I would think it does.
>> Yeah, we had some.
>> So you went to the
parks a fair amount.
>> We went to
parks, but I also--
little kids can create beauty
and magic out of everything--
>> One tree in the
neighborhood is enough.
>> And we have one tree in
front of my house that I sang
to every day.
>> Oh, that's so sweet.
>> And would lay in the
backyard and sing to the moon,
and the moon would
sing back to me.
And so I just felt like
life was here to be enjoyed,
but yet, even at a
really, really young age,
I was aware of the suffering.
I grew up in an
immigrant neighborhood,
and I just wanted to be
of some kind of help.
And so when I was
seven years old,
surprisingly, right in
my house in Brooklyn,
people always asked
how did this happen
in your house in Brooklyn,
a streak of lightning
came through the
window and hit me
and threw me against the wall.
>> What are the odds of that?
I mean, they're impossible.
And I went unconscious,
and I came back,
and my mother was there.
And I said Mommy, I
died, Mommy, I died.
And she said, no, you didn't.
And I don't remember
any experience.
There was no spiritual
experience for me,
like later on of seeing
God and hearing the music.
But in shamanism,
shamanism being
a universal, spiritual practice,
dating back over 100,000 years,
one of the signs of a shaman
is getting hit by lightning.
And so at that time, I
didn't make any associations,
but as I grew, I found that
I was so hungry for anything
spiritual, anything
spiritual, and then
when I was introduced
to shamanism,
it was like oh my
god, that's it.
Being hit by lightning is
actually the sign of a shaman
and that this was my
initiation on to a life path.
>> And then the next one of
these experiences, you drown.
>> Yeah.
>> OK, let's talk
about that one,
because that's a great
fear of a lot of people.
>> Yeah, and that one really
opened up my life for me quite
a bit.
I lived in the '60s, and I
did the whole '60s thing.
>> Oh, we're going to
get into that big time.
>> So during that time
was when I drowned.
Some friends of mine
from the Haight Ashbury,
we went down to Mexico, and
we went swimming in the ocean
in Mazatlan, and there
was a really strong tide.
And the very last things I
remember was my friend Tubby,
who was like 300 pound Mexican
bandido, yelling at me,
whatever happens,
Sandy, don't panic,
and I'm going in the water,
and I realize I can't breathe,
and I keep saying to myself,
Tubby said don't panic,
Tubby said don't panic.
And all of a sudden,
a tunnel opened up,
and I followed out into
this gorgeous light.
And I came into a stunning
landscape, a garden,
and sat on a stone bench.
It was a territory that
doesn't exist on this planet.
And I heard the
most amazing music,
and then that was when I felt
all this pain in my chest,
and I had washed
up on the beach,
and people had brought me back.
But really, experiencing that
peace, that unconditional love,
that sound of the universe
that music of the universe,
what is holding all
of us all the time,
that set me on a path
to want to know more,
and I was working at
San Francisco State,
and I came back,
and my boss said,
you had a near-death
experience, and so--
>> Now, why did he say that?
>> Because I told
him what happened.
>> OK, yeah.
>> And he started turning
me on to different books
on near-death experiences,
and I ended up joining Ken
Ring's organization for
near-death studies and helped
other people with near-death
experiences understand what
their experience was with them.
>> Well, and it wasn't over yet,
but it's jogging my own memory
of an event that happened in my
own life that I always wondered
if it was a near-death
experience because I
didn't have the grand
experience others had,
but it was drowning also.
And I just remember being
trapped under a log,
and it was slimy,
and I couldn't move.
And I'd been under, and
I thought, oh my god, I
can see the sun.
The breaking point of
the water, the surface
is only about a foot or two
away, I can see the sun.
Is this how it ends?
And that was it.
Everything went black, and
my body popped up quite a bit
downstream.
And I don't know what
happened, obviously.
I passed out or something
and must have gone limp,
and it must have
allowed the stream
to take me wherever it
was going to take me.
I don't know what happened, but
I came out coughing obviously,
very shaken up, but it
was just missing time.
>> Yeah, that's the way it was--
>> The first time.
>> When I was hit by lightning.
>> Yeah.
OK, so the story's not
over, because you also
drove off a cliff.
You were having some hard times.
>> Well, I also have stories
that you don't have there.
>> Oh, you can share them.
People love stories because we
like to see ourselves in it,
and we also like to
see what's possible,
and what's possible
to survive, you know,
the indominability
of the human spirit,
and you certainly
represent that.
So let's talk about
the time off the cliff.
>> Yeah, I was working
for the Forest Service,
and I was up in Oregon, and
I was in a line of cars.
We were all going to work.
And some of the trucks
were going to fast
through some of the
curves, and all this dirt
came up into my windshield.
And I'm not the best
driver in the world,
and I did everything
you're not supposed to.
>> Well, you probably panicked
and were startled by it all.
>> Yeah, and I slammed
my foot on the brakes,
and we went flying off
the cliff, five of us,
and one tree caught us.
We rolled five times.
So I got the name
Rolling Sandy after that.
>> Wow.
>> And we called AAA,
believe it or not.
AAA came a few hours
later and towed us out,
and we got back in the car.
>> And everyone was safe.
>> Everybody was safe.
We got back in the car,
and we kept driving.
And so then, I almost got hit
by about a 10 ton boulder.
>> Right.
>> Climbing Mount Shasta.
And that one was a big one.
I really almost died, and that
one took a long time for me
to heal from, but
the message I finally
got of what all these
near-death experiences was about
was it was time to learn that
living life on Earth was good
and to stop trying to
get out of my body.
And so Mount Shasta was
where I had that experience--
>> Tell us about it.
>> Of the boulder.
Yeah.
We were climbing Mount Shasta,
and we had left base camp,
and this unbelievable
sound started
coming from the distance.
And I say to my friend
I'm hiking with,
do you know what's going on?
And he said, let's just
stand and wait and see.
And all of a sudden, I see
this boulder coming at me,
and it's like it
was tracking me.
If I went right, it went right.
If I went left, it went left.
And I was wearing crampons
to help me walk in the ice.
I had to jump so hard to
get away from the boulder
that my crampon actually
got stuck up here.
That's how high I was jumping.
>> Wow.
>> And so my crampon
got stuck in my shirt,
and I'm hopping on one foot
while this boulder's tracking
me, and I'm going,
I have to lay down.
I can't keep jumping.
And I go, oh my god, this
is going to hurt so bad.
And I said, but
it's going to hurt
so bad for a
millionth of a second,
and I said that millionth of a
second is going to hurt so bad.
Please don't let this happen.
Please.
And it missed me by five feet.
>> Wow.
>> And Mount Shasta is
actually my power spot.
I lived there back
in the 1970s and had
unbelievable experiences,
meeting what I believe
were the Lemurian people.
And I just had amazing
experiences hiking alone
on the mountain,
and Mount Shasta
was letting me know that I
didn't appreciate life enough,
and if I didn't
appreciate life enough,
life was going to take me out.
>> Interesting.
Beyond interesting.
OK, I just came back from Mount
Shasta just a few days ago
actually, and the people--
and I was only there
for a brief time.
I've been there a
number of times,
but just for a couple days,
no big hikes or anything.
But some of the
people I was around
were talking about
these people that they
would run into there that seemed
out of place, out of time.
But they would have these kind
of interesting, intriguing,
or beautiful messages
they just kind of out
of the blue drop on someone.
So what was your experience?
When you say the Lemurians, who
did you perceive as Lemurians,
or how did they appear to you?
>> Well, I loved hiking
in Mount Shasta by myself,
and I remember it was
a really snowy day,
and I was hiking alone, and I
sat down to just be embraced
in beauty, and I started
hearing these bells ringing,
and they were really clear bells
in the middle of the woods.
I was living there on and off,
so I was living with a friend.
So I wasn't real grounded there.
I didn't know all the stories,
the myths, the history.
And so when I got back
down to town, and I said,
well, I was out hiking, and I
heard all these amazing bells,
and they said, oh,
that's the Lemurians.
They're a race of people
that live under the earth.
>> Is that in what they
termed the city of Telos,
the place called Telos?
I know that there's thought
to be a city, a place,
called Telos, where people
come and migrate back
and forth from the surface.
>> I've definitely
heard of that place,
but I hadn't heard the name.
>> Interesting.
It is a fascinating place if you
can have time to actually spend
a lot of time there.
I've heard lore of all
kinds from the very lightest
to some of the
darkness there, too.
Both.
Like Sedona, it
attracts the poles,
you know, extremes, because
the energy is so potent.
>> It's so potent.
>> Whatever that
pole is is amplified.
Just stay on the light side,
I guess, is the hint there.
OK, so we'll back up
again for a moment now.
Obviously, part
of the reason you
were trying to escape your body
is because life was painful.
In your book, you said that
when you were around 13,
you really start
realizing were an empath,
and that's where your
depression was coming from
is you were actually taking
on everyone else's pain,
like you said in your
neighborhood, right?
>> Yeah.
I was one of those kids.
You know, my father had a mom
and pop store a few blocks
from my house, and so I used
to go to the store after school
sometimes to help out,
and I was just-- you know,
I was only about seven or eight.
And I'd be walking
down the street
and people would just stop
me and say can I talk to you,
and they'd start telling
me their problems.
And then I worked
at my father's store
from when I was like
seven, and there
was this whole group of people
who only came in to talk to me.
They would have to buy
some things, so they would.
I even remember a nun coming in.
She came in every night
that I worked, and she said,
you're such a special child.
I just come in to talk to you.
I have a capacity to listen,
and I have a capacity
to be able to really feel what
somebody is going through,
the deepest place where
they're being touched.
And I realized when
I was 13, and I
was depressed all the
time, and I was going,
I have a great life.
I love to play outside.
I love school.
Why am I so sad all the time?
And I realized I was just
picking up on so many people's
pain, and I wasn't given tools
to learn how to work with that,
you know, growing
up in a family--
>> Who is, right?
>> Where everybody's
just trying to survive.
So that became a
big part of my path
was learning how to
be there for people,
but not carry their
pain at the same time.
>> But along the way while you
were still trying to adjust
to this reality of yours, you
had what you call a functional
nervous breakdown.
>> Mm-hmm.
Absolutely.
When the Vietnam
War came around,
it was just too much for me.
I was on Wall Street every
day, protesting, getting
hit by beer cans and gassed and
all the things that happened.
And I was only a teenager,
and I realized at that point,
I had no power to create
change, that no matter
how much I disagreed with
something politically,
I had no power to create change,
and that was the message I got.
And so what I did
at a survival--
I'm a survivalist.
I've come through a lot, and
I've come through really well.
I decided that for
my survival, it
was just best not to know what
was going on in the world.
So I stopped reading
newspapers, and I
stopped watching the news.
I had no idea who
the president was.
>> For 10 years.
>> For about 10 years.
>> Which I can't even fathom
how you could shield yourself
enough to not hear
it in passing.
So you must have led a very
solo existence during that time.
>> Well, I had huge community.
>> How did not hear learn about
these things inadvertently?
>> Well, we weren't
talking about politics.
>> I can understand that.
>> And I worked at
San Francisco State,
and I managed a Student
Learning Center.
And I was assistant manager
of a Student Learning Center.
And one of the
people I worked with,
he read the newspaper
every day, and so he always
had that newspaper on his desk,
and so I'd just avert my eyes.
And then I got
interested, and I wanted
to look at the front page.
And I glanced down at the front
page, and for the first time,
I read the headlines.
And slowly, like a person going
through behavior training,
every day, I read another
headline and another headline
til I was--
>> To re-engage with what was
happening on the exterior.
>> Yeah.
>> Now, in the
midst of all that,
and you alluded
to it a while ago,
you were living in
the Haight Ashbury.
>> Yeah.
>> And so you were part of the
whole kind of free love or drug
culture.
>> Right.
>> We were there
at the same time.
I was afraid of that culture.
I just rolled in little
bumpkin from Sacramento
going to a fashion institute and
had my little fancy clothes on.
And every now and then, I'd
go through the Haight Ashbury
for some reason
or another, and I
remember being so
frightened at how disorderly
and out of control the
whole thing looked.
And also people
obviously checked
out, a lot of glassy eyes,
and like where are they?
What's going on?
And so you were living
it to heal something
or to avoid something, the
pain or whatever inside you.
Talk about it from
that perspective.
I never got it.
>> Right.
>> Because of a
natural fear of being--
I don't know, I guess
that out of control maybe.
Who knows?
>> Yeah, well, what happened for
me was being in Brooklyn during
the '60s, that was
a drug culture.
And so that was when I
got introduced to LSD
and psychedelics and marijuana.
And so I would have these
amazing spiritual experiences
of how beautiful this planet was
and that our real destiny here
was to be joyful.
But I was looking around
me at all these people
who were trapped in lives
that were meaningless,
and and that just brought
them to tears every day.
I mean, the crying I heard
growing up in Brooklyn.
And so I felt there had to
be another life somewhere.
There had to be people
living a different life that
weren't so trapped.
And so I only had
stories to go by.
>> About out west, where they
said all the fruits and nuts
rolled.
I was born in San
Francisco, so I
mean it was just where I was
bathed in and was used to.
>> Right.
>> Yeah, it had quite a
reputation in the rest
of the world.
>> Oh, yeah, right.
Well, I started to hear
about it, and so two of us
decided to go out there, and
the other two people got sick.
So I ended up
going out on my own
and not I mean-- my god,
talk about being ignorant.
I got an airplane.
I thought that Haight
Ashbury was going
to be right after I got off.
I didn't even know how to get
anywhere or where I was going.
>> At least knew to hitch
a ride into the city.
>> That's right.
And so I met a
couple of my airplane
who took me in and
dropped me off.
I had heard about the
Good Earth commune,
and actually a movie was
made about that Stacy Keach.
So I lived there
for a few years.
And the news didn't
hit Brooklyn yet
that the Haight Ashbury
had actually been
buried in Golden Gate Park.
And so when I got there,
it was really dead.
It was deserted.
There was a liquor
store on every corner,
and everything was boarded up.
But there was still enough
of this energy, this desire
of people to come together
in a different way
and to live life
from a different way,
from an expanded state
of consciousness,
from heart and love, not hate.
>> Well, interestingly,
even without it being Haight
Ashbury, that was more the tone
of being in California at that
time.
I mean, because I was part--
I'd go see Janis
Joplin in the park,
and I was fine with all
of that, all the music.
And you know, long skirts.
Women didn't wear bras.
We didn't wear bras at
the time and organic food.
It was the drugs, but then I
didn't really even drink coffee
till I was over 40 or tea.
I just-- it didn't taste good.
None of that appealed to me.
I kind of just liked my mind as
it was, except for smoking some
ragweed in the '70s, which I'd
just bake brownies, eat, laugh,
and go to sleep, not
like what we have today,
not mind altering
in that day at all.
But it was a very
different thing
to choose to go into this deep
world of these mind altering
drugs.
I mean, I always thought, gosh,
that's really courageous on one
level, and I also thought,
that's really crazy on another
because you don't know what
it's going to do to your brain.
>> Right, exactly.
For me, I'm such
a grounded person,
I never had a bad experience.
I was really lucky I never
had a bad experience.
For me, what the draw was
and what the addiction
became for me was I would see,
no matter what drug I took,
all I saw was God, and I
experienced unconditional love.
And I was shown how we could
have a different experience
here on Earth.
And so what happened for me is--
I can't remember
what year it was.
I was probably late
20s, early 30s.
I was at a Grateful
Dead concert in Oakland,
and I was high on LSD, and
my kidneys were killing me.
And I stood there,
and I said to myself,
and I said, Sandy, so everything
is God, everything is love,
and you're hurting yourself
by taking these drugs.
Please get the message
and hang up the phone.
And so I did, and I
stopped taking drugs.
>> That's good, because you had
already got you were you were
connecting in the
most positive way.
And just as a kind of final--
I ended up probably taking
all of those over time.
A little bit of--
I mean, like once or twice,
just to see what it was.
And I'm glad I did, and
it was the same as you.
Everything was filled with
light and color and wonderful,
and one time, one dose of
ecstasy, and I was gone.
I was so out of my body, my
friend thought I was dead.
You know, I was just
having fun saying bummer,
that he's so concerned,
I'm having fun out here.
And I realized
that's probably why
I didn't do drugs is I'm
not that tethered here.
I'm not that
grounded, and it just
would not have helped things.
Where if you were
already grounded,
you needed to be lifted up to
see the beauty of what life
really is.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> I can understand that.
Thank you for
sharing that with us.
It makes sense.
So OK, now let's get you
through to the point where
Harner, Michael
Harner, where you
met Michael Harner, and then
the real shamanistic part
of your life started
coming to fruition.
>> I went to San
Francisco State,
and I got my BA in marine
biology, and then I realized,
I really want to be
working with people.
And so I ended up in a private
graduate school, California
Institute of Asian Studies,
now California Institute
of Integral Studies.
And it was just a tiny
school in the Mission
District in San Francisco.
It was expensive, and so
I had to work two jobs
to put myself through school,
and I was always burnt
out taking 12 units a quarter.
And somebody came into the
office one day and said,
a man's coming out
from Connecticut,
I don't have a clue
what he's teaching,
but you could get two
easy units if you sign up
for this weekend workshop.
So I went running into the
registrar's office, put
my name.
I didn't even look at what
the title of the workshop was.
>> Yeah, two easy units.
>> Two easy units, I put my
name down, and I showed up.
It was Halloween of
1980 in San Francisco.
I showed up to this
Friday night session,
and it was an anthropologist,
who's now deceased,
Michael Harner,
teaching a course
on what was called shamanic
journeying and shamanism.
And a shaman is a
man or woman who
goes into an altered
state of consciousness
and has access to these
amazing helping spirits who
just want to guide us and heal
us and help us with our life.
And so I met my helping
spirit, and he just
started answering all the
questions I had in life,
and I was hooked.
I mean, there I was.
There's this disembodied spirit,
I'm laying down on the floor
listening to some drumming,
talking to this spirit,
telling me all the questions,
unanswered questions
I have in my life
and what I need to do
and why I'm having issues.
And I was like, this
is what I was looking
for because I'd been looking
for spiritual practices because
of my--
>> Obviously.
>> Opening experiences.
But I couldn't find a path,
and shamanism gave me a path.
And so then, since 1980,
I've devoted every single day
to that path, which has taken
me through twists and turns
and started with
shamanic journeying,
but moved to teaching about
working with reversing
environmental pollution,
to moving to teaching
how to perform ceremonies.
And I became best
known for my work
with helping people bring
back the parts of their soul.
>> Soul retrieval.
>> Their vital essence.
>> I wanted to spend some time
talking about that actually.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, so it's been
over 30 years of--
>> Coming up on 40 years.
>> Yeah, it's coming up on 40.
There's always another
door to walk through.
I haven't even begun to learn
about the power of this work.
It's really amazing.
>> And what's flowing into my
mind right now is I'm thinking
that this was your path in a
very specific way through this
man's view or lens of
shamanic work, right?
>> Right.
>> And this is what flashed
in is throughout history,
there have been these mystics
that have nothing to do with
South America or
doing ayahuasca,
because now shamanism and
shamanic work has very much
become kind of conflated with
ayahuasca, South America,
Central America, and
journeying, right?
But in reality, people
like Hildegard of Bingen,
for example, she
was a shaman, right?
>> Right, absolutely.
>> Meister Eckhart,
he was a shaman.
So there you're looking in kind
of classic mystical theology
or mystical Christianity,
and they've popped up all
throughout every tradition.
There are people that
functionally would be
called shaman, wouldn't they?
>> Absolutely.
Shamanism is much broader.
What's happening in today's
culture is we're so rational.
And so we like to put
everything in boxes.
And so shamanism has
been put in a box
that either it's Native American
or it's South American, where
my draw to shamanism
was Siberian shamanism
and the Inuit tradition.
I know nothing about
South American shamanism
and ayahuasca, but that
has not been my path.
But there's this box that now
everybody put shamanism in,
and the word shaman itself
comes from the Tungus tribe
in Siberia, and it's
actually a Tungus word,
and it means one who sees
in the dark, a healer,
and one who knows.
And so there are so many
initiations to the path
of shamanism that lead
people to have this ability
to be able to pull aside the
veils of the ordinary realms
that we live in here,
where everything is
two dimensional, really flat.
But when you lift the veils and
go into the unseen and those
non-ordinary realms--
>> In the causal realms.
>> Yeah, the dimensions
of reality, the spirits,
the plants, the
crystals, the trees,
who want to engage in our lives
and bring us into a whole new
dimension of reality that has
nothing about how we're living
life on Earth, there are places
that you can go to, and it
doesn't take ayahuasca, it
doesn't take being a shaman
from South America, although
their work is magnificent.
I mean, it's magnificent.
But people from all over the
world, all walks of life,
can be a shaman
when they've gone
through the initiation that
brings them to one who knows.
>> And it just--
it's heartbreaking to think
of how our minds have been
funneled down such a narrow
chute of understanding
and even the
perception of reality.
Most people live in
such a dry understanding
of the world they're in, because
they haven't had the experience
to blast open, to see everything
in its multi-dimensional full
living color form.
All things have those dimensions
to it, not just humans.
We think, oh, well,
we're multidimensional.
So is every planet.
So is the earth herself.
And being able to travel
into those higher realms,
and to me, that's, I think,
maybe the most beautiful thing
about shamanic work
that people like you do
and people who guide
others into this
is to open up the realm
of beauty and possibility.
>> And so what happens is
that people don't only open up
to a beauty of another world.
They open up to the beauty
of their inner landscape,
because what's happening
now in the world
we live in is life has
become meaningless.
>> Yes, truly.
>> And one of the differences if
you do go to a shamanic culture
and the cultures in South
America that so many people are
traveling to right now, what
they're seeing is a light
coming out of these people's
eyes, a joy, a light,
and it doesn't matter how
poor they are and how much
catastrophe they suffer
in their life, that joy,
that light is always flowing,
and that's because what
shamanism teaches us because
it's a nature based practice is
that we have entered dimensions
inside of ourselves where we
have these beautiful gardens,
a beautiful landscape.
And when we get in touch with
that beautiful landscape,
we see beauty everywhere.
But what's happening right
now is because people feel
life is empty, it's
meaningless, when they look
through an empty landscape,
the inner landscape,
there's no joy,
there's no light.
So they're searching where
will I find that light?
Who can give me that light?
And so people are running
to shamanic cultures
right now without understanding
shamans can't give you
that light.
You have to find it within you.
>> Absolutely.
OK, now this will take us
right into soul retrieval, how
we become fractured
over incarnations.
>> Yeah, so the word soul that
I work with is soul is our life
force.
It's our essence.
It's that part of ourselves
that keeps us alive.
And in shamanic cultures,
it's believed that whenever
we suffer an emotional
or physical trauma
that a piece of our
soul actually leaves
our body in order to
survive the experience.
So I always use
the same example.
I'm sure people are bored
of hearing a successful,
but if I'm going to be in
a head on car collision,
the very last place I want
to be at the point of impact
is in my body.
and so our psyche has
this brilliant self
protect mechanism.
You go away while the
trauma is occurring.
And so at that
point, we lose a part
of their soul, our essence,
and it's through shock.
Anything that creates
shock causes soul loss,
and so in our culture, emotional
abuse, sexual abuse, accidents,
surgery, drug addiction,
grief, alarm clocks
going off too early
in the morning,
anything that causes
shock can cause soul loss.
And the symptoms of a
person who has soul loss
are people who they don't
really feel like they're here,
they feel more dissociated,
they're watching life
like it's a movie.
Everybody seems to be
more engaged in life
than they are, immune
deficiency problems, depression,
suicidal tendencies,
anybody who says to me,
I don't feel the
same sense, and they
don't mean that in a good way.
And so from a shamanic
point of view, oftentimes
those parts don't come
back on their own.
And it takes a
trained shaman to be
able to travel into the unseen
realms, where that soul escaped
to, track it down, and
say it's a new time,
it's a new life, it's
time to come back,
and to bring back the
gifts that the person maybe
lost their ability to imagine,
their ability to trust,
their ability to love,
their ability to laugh.
You bring those
parts back again,
and you feel such a fullness.
When I first had my
first soul retrieval,
I just felt this bliss.
I mean, all of a sudden, I
was fully back in my body.
Colors were so bright.
I could hear things
in a different way.
And then I started
to look at my life,
and I was going, wait a second.
You don't want to be doing.
This isn't healthy.
So when you're fully
back in your body again,
you make different choices.
And so we can look at what's
happening in the world
right now is global
soul loss, because who
would say that money is
more important than the life
of living beings?
That, to me, is collective
soul loss when we--
>> Oh, absolutely.
>> When we make
choices out of greed.
>> To support artificial
constructs instead of life
itself.
>> Yeah.
>> I totally agree with you.
I had a dream one
time, which is brief.
I was in a car with my
father on a mountain road
like you're talking
about in the Sierra,
one I've actually been on.
And it's frightening.
You know, it's a
straight drop off.
And I was in a big old, like
an old Oldsmobile or Cadillac,
just huge, with really
sloppy steering, you know?
And so anyway, I was driving my
father, and boom, off the cliff
we go.
And I thought, oh, darn it.
I thought, OK, I'll
just get out of my body.
So I climbed out of my body, and
I thought, oh my god, my father
doesn't know.
All you have to do is
get out of your body.
I have to go back
and go down with him.
And when it came
from that dream,
I realized that's the grace
and what happens in real life.
That is what happens.
I think very seldom
is anyone actually
in their body at the point of
a real blunt trauma like that.
We're already out.
There's grace in all of it.
>> There is grace.
>> But as you say, if
we're already out then,
how does that trauma occur?
Enough that we would
have soul loss.
You see what I'm saying?
If you climbed out before the
accident, before the trauma.
>> Mm-hmm.
Well, there's the element
of shock, and again, shock--
>> Again, in the
physical body, too.
>> In the physical body, and
what shock does for us is it
dissociates us enough so that
we don't get that full impact
of the pain, and that
actually allows us to heal.
So one of the controversies
I have with my students
is when somebody is in
a really bad accident,
you know, the whole community
wants to get together,
and let's do a soul
retrieval for this person.
And yes, a soul retrieval does
need to be done for the person
but not right after the
time of such a big trauma.
Give just a little space--
>> Yeah, it's too fresh.
>> Of the psyche.
And then let's come in
as a loving community
and do that work.
>> So what does that look like?
What does soul retrieval
in a group look like?
>> Well, a soul
retrieval is where--
in all shamanic work,
what's happening
is the shaman does a
lot of preparation work
to lift himself or herself
out of an egoic state
of consciousness,
because the ego,
the rational mind has
nothing to do with shamanism.
It's about our divine spirit.
And so we dance, and we sing
until our burdening thoughts
and our anchoring thoughts
and who's Sandra Ingerman,
and I don't know
who's Sandra Ingerman.
I mean, you really go
into an expanded state.
And from that--
>> And you're
shifting frequencies.
The music, the drumming,
and the movement
shifts frequencies
to another level.
>> Exactly.
Yeah.
And so shamanism is not
an out of body experience,
because the shaman takes
his or her body with them
into the unseen realms.
And so all of a sudden,
your divine has come alive,
and your divine can now meet
the divine of the unseen realms.
And that allows a flow
of energy to go through,
where any kind of healing
forces could come in
to help the planet, or
spirits can come through
to show where that
piece of soul fled to.
If your whole soul
leaves, you die.
So you know, it's a piece
of your soul, a fragment.
And so the spirits show you
where that soul fled to.
And for me, at that
point, you never
see two shamans work the
same around the world.
So you can't say
how shamans work.
How I work is I pull with
intention that lost soul
to me so I feel that frequency,
that invisible energy coming
into form.
And then I get up and blow
into my client's heart center
and into their crown with the
intention of really seeing
every cell filling back up
with their divine light again,
and they feel it.
They feel a difference.
>> I bet they do.
That's beautiful.
>> It might not be immediately.
For some people, it
takes a few weeks.
And some people, they have to
do emotional work before they--
they've been so
out of their body,
they can't feel
being in their body
until they do some
integration work.
>> Well, since we're in
a big self-help DIY genre
of information and such, how can
a person also maybe begin doing
this on their own with
their own intention?
Can people do their
own soul retrieval?
>> Well, from a
shamanic point of view,
shamanism dates back
over 100,000 years.
So we have to understand that
nobody's practicing shamanism
like it was originally
practiced and that the reason
it's been around for over
100,000 years is it works,
because what spiritual practice
is alive after 100,000 years.
And it evolves to keep needing
the needs of the people
and the needs of the time.
>> And also to meet our level
of understanding in the time,
because it has devolved
and then evolved,
devolved again repeatedly.
And so that practice has had
to go through those same shifts
as the awareness has
changed over time.
>> Absolutely.
Yeah, and so in classic
old time shamanism, people
didn't do healing
work for themselves.
You went to the
shaman for healing.
In today's world, everybody
wants to heal themselves,
like you said.
I tell people no, you
gotta go see somebody
for soul retrieval.
And they go, no, I
want to do it myself.
And I go, well, try
it, but you need
to make sure that you
feel results afterwards,
because everything in
shamanism is about results.
If the shaman couldn't
heal the people,
if the shaman couldn't find
food sources for the people,
the people died.
So this just wasn't an
airy fairy practice.
>> No, it was like
the druidic culture,
the early druidic cultures, the
survivors of what many believe
were Atlantis, when these
things were normal practices.
I was one of them.
I used to practice these
things way back when
and remember some of the
incredibly beautiful ways
in which we were able to bring
people back into wholeness,
just using sun and light,
color and so forth.
>> And sound.
>> And sound, absolutely.
>> Is really big right now, too.
>> This was just a
normal part of life,
but here we are now
cut off from all that.
You can go to your HMO
if you have insurance,
try to get fixed.
So this is a whole
different deal.
So we do feel very splintered.
We feel very individualistic .
We don't feel part of
tribes that we're really
part of a tribe or even a family
or even a group of friends
for a lot of people.
We're so isolated
right now as a species.
And so that's why I
ask that question.
But we're always
surrounded by our guidance.
>> We're always surrounded
by our guidance,
and so what I love to teach
is how to do ceremony,
because you can--
>> And that gets
us to your book,
which has been so fun
just getting to know you
and your path, but we still have
some time left, so of course,
I want to get into
ceremony and your new book.
>> Yeah, so ceremony
is a sacred act,
and ceremony is where
we set an intention,
and we move out of our
ego, as I shared earlier,
and we meet with divine forces
for the dream we want to pull
from that world into this world.
And so ceremony ends up acting
as building blocks, where
every time you
perform a ceremony,
you're creating another building
block that's leading you
closer to your dreams.
And I like to think of
shamans as gardeners,
gardeners of energy.
That's all we're doing
is we garden energy.
And so with ceremony, you
can go into an altered state
of consciousness.
Anybody can.
I've taught this to
fundamentalist Christians.
There's no population I
haven't taught ceremony to.
And you open up
to the divine part
of the world where through
your songs and your chants,
whether it's calling
back your soul
or whether it's breaking
the bad connection
you have with others, really
unhealthy relationships.
>> And we're seeing so
much of it right now.
>> I know.
>> People are shattered
and disconnected.
>> So shattered
Time to cut those cords,
time to cut those chords.
Or maybe it's time to celebrate
fall coming, the Equinox,
and to give gratitude
for your life
for it to perform a ceremony,
to bring meaningful work
into your life or find a
meaningful path like we're
talking about that takes
us out of the box of living
in a world where our
senses are deadened.
We can't we can hear the
songs of the universe
without hearing them on
our devices, you know,
where shamans hear the
songs singing through them
all the time.
And so it's through ceremony
by creating that intention,
creating sacred space, calling
in your own divine spirit,
calling in the spirits beyond.
We end up creating bridges from
these non-ordinary realms where
we can--
it's almost like a spinner spins
through a new fabric of life
that we want for ourselves,
we want for our community,
we want for all of life, and
we want for the planet itself.
>> Let's talk about
some specific ways,
because here in your book,
when we talk about the use
of ritual, you go
into four areas.
One is honor, giving
thanks, offering blessings,
and asking for healings.
So let's go with these as
some really basic elements.
>> Yeah, honor is something I
think that we're missing a lot
of in our culture.
We really dishonor
ourselves in our behavior.
We dishonor other life.
And so in ceremony,
it's really important
to bring in what do you
honor and what are you
grateful for about life.
And so if you're
calling in the wind
instead of just--
in our culture,
one of the things that
are happening right now
is because of all
the weather changes,
people are commanding
the elements to stop,
but they never started with
building a relationship
with the elements as an ally.
So first, let's meet the
wind and honor the wind.
Wind was actually the first
living being on the planet.
It was here before anything
billions of years ago.
The earth is 4.6
billion years old.
So when water-- the primal
seas are billions of years old.
So when we start
bringing in the elements,
because elements are such an
important part of ceremony,
and the sun is actually the
youngest of the elements,
you're connecting with a
4.6 billion year earth.
You're connecting with the wind
that's billions of years old.
Think about the stability
in destabilizing times.
Think about the feeling of
centeredness and stability
that you feel if you
actually honor the elements
and imagine the earth, 4.6
billion year old earth,
working with you as
an outlier to make
your dream come through.
So first you have to honor
the earth for helping you.
You have to honor the animals
or that transcendent being
or that angel or
god for helping you.
Start with honor.
Who do you honor?
And your ancestors, they're
always watching your back.
In our culture, we have
so much traumatic memories
of our childhood and
stories about our ancestors.
But in shamanism, your ancestors
are who have your back.
Once they're
deceased, once they've
made that evolutionary leap,
and they're in a new frequency,
they want to see you succeed.
So how do you bring in the
ancestors to honor them?
And so for me, honor
is really important.
Honor is really important.
And when you honor the ancestors
of the land and the land
that you live on, all of
a sudden you have allies.
So I was teaching
a soul retrieval
training in Tennessee, and
it was during Hurricane Opal.
And we were going to
do a fire ceremony,
but there was this
hurricane, and we
were going to do the
fire ceremony to release
our greatest hurts to the fire.
We spent the day
making talismans
to release our greatest hurts.
And so what we were going to
do without the fire, well,
there was a little
fireplace in our room
that was literally
about this big.
And you know, there were--
it was a large group of people.
How were we all going to put
our talismans into the fire?
And I said, don't
worry about it.
Every ceremony is perfect.
It's all about intention.
It's all about honor and
creating sacred space.
Let's take this room we're
all going to have to stand in.
We're not going to be able
to dance and drum and be
in ecstasy.
And we start to build the
fire, and the hurricane stops.
All of a sudden, the
hurricane magically stopped.
So I said to everybody, take
a piece of wood and run,
and we ran as fast as we
could, and we built this fire
in this open gorgeous
meadow in the retreat center
in Tennessee.
And the second the last
person put in their talisman,
the hurricane came back.
1 amazing the power and how
nature will work with us.
But I think one thing that we
have often been overlooking--
we talk about climate change,
we talk about earth change--
Earth is going through
her own changes as well--
is honoring the fact that
this earth is her own being,
going through her own
processes of changing,
transforming, elevating,
healing, just like we do.
And if it's disturbing
to us and if it's
disturbing our
lifestyle, we need
to sit back and have
a little respect.
You know, we're a wonderful
co-creative guest with Earth
and not be trying to
necessarily command or stop
weather patterns and so forth.
That has nothing to do with
artificially created climate
change by the way
and what's happening
there with chem trails,
contrails, and so forth.
>> I understand.
>> Yeah.
I mean, and have respect enough
to let her go through what
she needs to as well.
>> Exactly.
Exactly.
And you could perform a ceremony
to honor that she is there.
>> Yes, and you
talked about this.
>> And to actually say
thank you to the earth,
thank you for holding me, thank
you for all that you give me,
all the beauty, and that
it creates relationship.
Human beings relate
to each other.
They relate to their
pets, but they're not
related to much outside.
>> And when weather happens,
we take it personally,
like someone's against us.
>> Right.
>> I just find it interesting
that we're so not a part
of the very beautiful planet
that we're lucky enough
to inhabit.
>> Yeah.
I was a firefighter temporarily
for the Fire Service,
and I learned that fire is
the most healing thing that
can happen to the earth.
>> Absolutely.
>> And so with my students,
I asked them to teach
their children about the
healing of storms and fires
and hurricanes, how--
I tell them to tell
their children,
think about taking a shower
and being able to wash
all the grunge off of yourself.
>> Exactly.
>> And I said that's
all the earth is doing.
>> Shake it off.
>> That's all she's
doing, and it gives--
instead of children being
so afraid of everything,
it gives them a
different perception.
And when we change
our perception,
we change our reality.
>> Indeed.
I have to say, I so agree
with the notion not just
of honoring, but I have
found on a personal level,
there's nothing that takes
your frequencies higher faster
than first thing in the
morning, taking the time
to just allow yourself to
run through the gratitude
list, everything
you're grateful for,
and you realize you're
actually grateful for a lot.
And by the time the
day begins, foom,
you have really ignited
a passion inside yourself
that doesn't happen if
you're not grateful.
>> Absolutely.
And in shamanism,
there's the principle
of sacred reciprocity,
and if you honor nature,
nature will honor you in return.
>> Absolutely.
I think that's a wonderful
antidote in today's world
to look out and not--
yes, in is important,
but also look out
and become grateful
for everything
that life is brought to you
and all of the beauty that
surrounds us, including grateful
for the parts of ourselves
that are a little wounded, that
need a little bit of light.
Before we go very, very quickly,
you have beautiful Hathor
pendant on.
Tell us about what
Hathor means to you.
>> Well, Hathor is
a mother goddess.
She is an aspect of the
divine feminine that
brings so much healing
to the feminine,
whether you're a woman or
a man, and in Egypt, women
go to the temple of Hathor when
they're trying to get pregnant,
and they put their
hands on the temple
and ask for help, a
blessing to have a baby.
She's such a beautiful
aspect of the divine mother,
and she brings so much
nurturance and beauty
into my life and healing into
my life and healing into others.
>> And this you do for others,
so you pass the gifts along.
I want to thank you so much.
It's been a wonderful
conversation,
such a very kind of serenely
passionate discussion
about your life in shamanism.
I really appreciate what you do.
>> Thank you, and thanks
for the brilliant work that
you're doing.
>> Thank you, Sandra.
The title of Sandra's book
is "The Book of Ceremony."
You can reach
deeper into her work
by going to sandraingerman.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]